
 TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH BETA 128 DISK INTERFACE -- USER MANUAL






COPYRIGHT

(C) 1986 Technology Research Ltd, Staines, Middlesex, England.

All  rights reserved. This manual contains proprietary information
which  is protected under copyright. No part of this manual may be
reproduced,  transcribed, stored in a retrieval system, translated
into any language or conputer language, or transmitted in any form
whatsoever  without  the  prior  consent  of  the  publisher.  For
information write to:

    TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD,
      UNIT 18, CENTRAL TRADING ESTATE,
        STAINES, MIDDLESEX TE18 4XE
          ENGLAND.


NOTICE


TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD  makes no  representations or  warranty of
any kind whatsoever  with  respect  to  the  contents  hereof  and
specifically  disclaims any inplied warranty of merchantability or
fitness  for any particular purpose. TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD shall
not be liable  for errors  contained herein  or for  incidental or
consequential  damages in connection with furnishing, performance,
or use of this material.

TECHNOLOGY   RESEARCH  LTD  reserves  the  right  to  revise  this
publication from  time to time and to  make changes in the content
hereof without obligation to notify any person of such revision or
changes.











PART NUMBER :  SSBOTE1                                    May 1986






                              page 1                              
 
Dear customer

Congratulations  in making a wise  choice. Technology Research Ltd
are  confident that you will have  many years of satisfied service
from  your interface. The wisdom of your choice is demonstrated by
the  fact that there is no  other Spectrum disk interface offering
all  these features:

* Easy and fast     Retrieves your data/program a lot faster than 
  access:           using cassette tape.

* Wide choice of    5.25", 3.5" or 3",  40 or 80 track, single  or 
  disk drives:      double  sided  disk  drives.  In short you can 
                    use most makes of disk drives on the market.

* Capacity:         Up  to 4 disk  drives on line.  Data is stored 
                    at   double  density.  These  give  a  maximum
                    capacity of over 2.5 million characters.

* Flexibility:      The  Interface is independent, so you can  use
                    your disk drives with other computers.

* Compatibility:    The  Interface  may  be  used  with  Spectrum,
                    Spectrum Plus and Spectrum 128 computers.

* Auto-boot:        Runs a BASIC program automatically on power-up
                    or after  a reset (Spectrum  and Spectrum Plus
                    only).

* Auto check:       Checks  and   adjusts   the  system  to  drive
                    specification automatically.

* Magic button:     This  special feature enables you to save tape
                    based programs at a touch of the button.

* System switch:    Use  this  3  position  switch  to  reset  the
                    computer or switch off the Interface.

* EPROM based       The disk operating system (TRDOS) is contained 
  TRDOS:            in EPROM, and it uses only 112 bytes of RAM.

* Syntax:           Simple  syntax using  Spectrum keywords allows
                    access to disk  files in  TRDOS from  BASIC or 
                    machine code.

* File handling:    TRDOS  handles   number   and  string  arrays,
                    serial  (sequential)  and  true random  access 
                    files.

This  booklet contains information that you will need to make full
use  of the Teclnology Research Beta 128 Disk Interface (hereafter
referred to as the Disk Interface).





                              page 2
 
Throughout this  manual,  references  are  made  to  the  Spectrum
computer, however, unless  otherwise  stated,   they  are  equally
applicable to the Spectrum Plus and Spectrum 128.

Using the Beta 128  Disk  Interface  with  the  Spectrum  and  the
Spectrum Plus (will be  referred to  as SPECTRUM  & PLUS)  are the
same.  For Spectrum 128, there are  a number of differences. These
will be highlighted where applicable.

The Disk Interface is supplied with a Utility Disk, which contains
a number of  Utility programs (see Appendix for details). The disk
may be 5.25" or 3.5" depending on your requirement.













































                              page 3
 
 CONTENTS


      1    INTRODUCTION TO DISK SYSTEM
           1.1    Disks and drives
           1.2    Tracks, sectors and density


      2    GETTING STARTED
           2.1    Making the right connection
           2.2    Auto-boot
           2.3    Auto-check of drive specification
           2.4    "40" and "80" commands
           2.5    Using other interfaces


      3    THE SYSTEM SWITCH
           3.1    Reset
           3.2    The off position


      4    QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE


      5    COMMAND SYNTAX
           5.1    Changing from TRDOS to SOS
           5.2    Changing from SOS to TRDOS
           5.3    Calling TRDOS from SOS and BASIC programs
           5.4    Default drive selection
           5.5    Temporary drive selection


      6    FORMATTING A DISK
           6.1    Format as single sided


      7    DISK CATALOGUE
           7.1    Displaying a catalogue
           7.2    Printing a catalogue

 
      8    COPYING FILES
           8.1    Copying to the same disk
           8.2    Single drive copy and backup
           8.3    Twin drive copy and backup


      9    RENAMING, ERASING FILES AND DISK HOUSEKEEPING
           9.1    Renaming a file - the NEW command
           9.2    Erasing a file - the ERASE command
           9.3    Packing disk space - the MOVE command






                              page 4
 
      10   SAVING, VERIFYING, LOADING, RUNNING AND MERGING PROGRAMS
           10.1   The SAVE and VERIFY commands
           10.2   The LOAD and RUN commands
           10.3   The MERGE command

 
      11   TRANSFERRING CASSETTE BASED PROGRAMS
           11.1   Program conversion
           11.2   The Magic button


      12   DATA ARRAY FILES


      13   SEQUENTIAL AND RANDOM ACCESS FILES
           13.1   General Description
           13.2   Sequential files
           13.3   Random access files


      14   DIRECT SECTOR READ/WRITE
           14.1   The PEEK command
           14.2   The POKE command


      15   MACHINE CODE PROGRAMMING


      16   ERROR MESSAGES
           16.1   On-line messages
           16.2   Error codes


      17   FACTS ABOUT TRDOS


      18   PIN CONNECTIONS OF THE DISK DRIVE CONNECTOR


      APPENDIX : UTILITY PROGRAMS
           A      TAPECOPY
           B      MAGIC 
           C      DOCTOR


      GUARANTEE











                              page 5                                   
 
1    INTRODUCTION TO DISK SYSTEM

The disk  system is the  professional way of  storing programs and
data  files in home and personal  computer systems. There are many
advantages  of using the disk system other than tape based systems
such as cassette  tape and  Microdrives. The  disk system  is more
reliable, easy to use and much faster.

Terminology  associated  with   floppy   disks   often   lead   to
confusion.  A short explanation will enable you to appreciate some
of  the concepts involved and thereby get the best use out of your
Technology Research Disk Interface.


1.1  Disks and Drives

The  Technology Research Beta  Plus Disk Interface  can use 5.25",
3.5"  and 3" disk drives.  You may have heard  them referred to as
floppy disk,  diskette, mini-disk or micro-disk.  We will refer to
them simply as disk. At present, 5.25" disks are  the most popular
type. However, the trend is towards the smaller disk of 3.5".

Diagram 2  and  3  show  the  sketches  of  5.25"  and  3.5"  disk
respectively.  The 5.25" diameter flexible  plastic coated disk is
kept in its own  little  cardboard  or  plastic  jacket.  Although
"flexible" the  disks should not  be bent. The  smaller 3.5" disks
are  housed in stronger  plastic protective cases  which, for some
time at least, means that their cost will be higher than the 5.25"
disks.

When  inserted in  the drive  the disks  are rotated  inside their
protective covers at 300 RPM.  To  protect  the  disk  the  better
quality ones have a plastic ring (the hub ring) around the edge of
the central  hole. It  is this  ring rather  than the  weaker disk
which is clamped by the drive mechanism.

In a cassette recorder  the tape  unwinds past  the head  which is
stationary. In  the disk drive not only  is the disk rotating past
the  head but the head also moves across the disk from the edge to
the centre.

The index hole and a similar hole in  the disk enable the drive to
keep  track of the  disk. The actual  data is written  to and read
from, the disk in the long slot or Data Window.

As  a safeguard for  valuable data the  "write-protected notch" in
the  jacket can be covered by a small sticky label. Like the small
tag on the  back of  a cassette  tape it  prevents the  disk being
written on or  erased accidentally.  The 3.5"  disk covers  have a
device similar to the cassette.







                              page 6
 
There  are 40 and 80 track disk  drives on the market. Many drives
are switchable to  allow  the use of  disks recorded  as 40  or 80
track. Some  drives have only one  read/write head (single sided).
These drives can  only read  and write  on one  side of  the disk.
Other drives have  two read/write  heads (double  sided), allowing
both sides of the disk to be used.

A  golden  rule  is  to  ensure  that  backups  are   made  before
overwriting disks originally produced and intended to be read on a
different  specification drive. Ideally if one user of the disk is
using 40 or 80 track drive then so should the other.

However, disks which are formatted and written by one type of disk
drive may be read  by a  different type  of drive.  Obviously, the
disk must  be physically the same size.  The chart below shows the
compatibility between various type of disk drives.

      Disk format    40T SS    40T D6    80T SS    80T DS

      Drive 40T SS    C         ?         X         X
            40T DS    C         C         X         X
            80T SS    R         ?         C         ? 
            80T DS    R         R         C         C

      where T = track
            SS = single sided
            DS = double sided
            C = compatible
            R = compatible (read only)
            X = incompatible 
            ? = incompatible but may not be detected correctly on
                some types of drive.

For example, a 40 track double sided drive is compatible (can read
from and write to) with disks formatted on a 40 track single sided
drive. But an 80 track double sided drive can only read from disks
formatted on a 40 track drive.


1.2 Tracks, sectors and density

The  formatting process (Section 6) enables TRDOS and the drive to
electronically  divide up the disk into 40 or 80 tracks (according
to the  disk drive)  and each  track into  sectors. The  number of
sectors  per track and the number of bytes per sector is dependent
entirely upon the Disk Operating System (D.O.S.).

TRDOS gives you  16 sectors per  track and 256  bytes per  sector.
This high number of small size sectors has several advantages.

Firstly  if only small amounts  of data are to  be stored then not
too  much of the disk will be used¯ This leads to a greater number
of files being saved.




                              page 7
 
Secondly when using  the  Random  Access  files  (Section  13)  it
provides   greater  program  flexibility  and  improves  speed  of
operation.

In  order to know what is where TRDOS uses Track 0, the outermost,
for its own directory purposes.

Given the above information it is possible to calculate the number
of sectors and  storage  capacity  of  the  formatted  disk.  This
formatted  capacity is the  only meaningful figure  for any system
but must  still be considered  in conjunction with  the number and
size  of the sectors. The following table shows the TRDOS capacity
in Kilobytes with different drives:

     40 track single sided =  39 * 16 =  624 sector * 256 = 156Kb
     40 track double sided =  79 * 16 = 1264 sector * 256 = 316Kb
     80 track single sided =  79 * 16                     = 316Kb
     80 track double sided = 159 * 16 = 2544 sector * 256 = 636Kb

For the  mathematically minded this equates to  4Kb per track or 4
sectors  to 1Kb. This last evaluation is probably the most useful.
When  examining the contents of a disk by CAT (Section 7) you will
always be told the number of free sectors. Divide this number by 4
and you know how many Kb of spare space remains.

You will notice that we have not mentioned density. Single density
and Double  density refer to  the recording method  of packing the
data  on the disk. TRDOS uses double  density which is why you get
16 sectors of 256 bytes per track.




























                              page 8
 
2   GETTING STARTED

2.1 Making the right connection

Now  that you have the Disk Interface and one or more disk drives,
please  first   read  and  understand   the  following  procedures
thoroughly before proceeding  with  the installation. If  you have
other interfaces, please also read Section 2.5 below.

2.1.1  The  first  step  is  to look at Diagram 1 and identify the
       four connections. The  connection   labelled  A  should  be
       plugged into the back of the Spectrum unless an Interface 1
       is fitted.  In that case  the Interface 1  goes between the
       Spectrum  and the Disk Interface. The connection opposite A
       is for adding your other interfaces, e.g. joystick.

2.1.2  Before  connecting the Disk Interface  to the Spectrum, you
       must clean  the connector on the  Spectrum, by rubbing both
       sides gently with a cotton bud dipped in methylated spirit.

2.1.3  Your   disk  drive  should  already   be  fitted  with  the
       appropriate  plug on its connecting lead and this should be
       inserted in the "Disk  Drive  Port" (labelled  B in Diagram
       1). Make sure the coloured side of the flat ribbon cable is
       towards the Spectrum.

2.1.4  Plug in the Disk Drive mains lead and switch on.

2.1.5  Switch on the TV.

2.1.6  SPECTRUM & PLUS : Ensure  the  System switch  is  in   the
                         centre, normal position.

       Spectrum 128    : Ensure the System switch is in the off
                         position.

2.1.7  Plug the power socket from your Spectrum power supply  into
       the power supply connection (labelled C in Diagram 1).

2.1.8  SPECTRUM & PLUS : If more than 1 drive is fitted only drive
                         A  will now engage and after a second you
                         should see the following sign-on display:

                                     * TR-DOS Ver 5.xx *
                              (C) 1986 Technology Research Ltd. 
                                           (U.K.)

                              A>

                        where 5.xx is the  version number, and A>
                        is the TRDOS prompt.





                              page 9


                         It is  possible  that  on  power  up, the
                         Spectrum  fails  to  recognise  the  Disk
                         Interface. That  is, the  sign-on display
                         above does  not appear on  the screen. If
                         this happens,  just  reset  the  Spectrum
                         using  the System switch  as described in
                         Section 3.1.

SPECTRUM 128           : The  Spectrum 128 starts up as normal. To
                         change to TRDOS, type the following:
                      
                                   RANDOMIZE USR 15616 <ENTER> 

                         where <ENTER> is the key ENTER.
                          
                         The screen will  then  show  the  sign-on
                         display as shown above.

You are now in TRDOS. After having read the rest of the manual you
will be able  to use the  wide variety of  commands and facilities
available.  But first of all, you may  try out an example with the
Utility disk supplied.  The Utility  disk is  write-protected (see
Section 1.1), and should be kept as such.

Insert Utility  disk into  Drive A  (and close  the drive door  if
necessary).  The CAT command (see Section  7.1 for details) may be
used to display  the  contents  of  the  Utility  disk.  Type  the
following after the TRDOS prompt A> and see what happens:

     CAT <ENTER>

Note that  CAT  is a keyword and  <ENTER> represents the ENTER key
on the keyboard. The screen will show something like this:

     Title: $Utili
     6 file(s)
     0 Del. file(s)
     A:secread <C>  1:tape5.0 <C>  4 
     A:doctor  <B> 22:tapecopy<B>  1
     A:boot    <B>  3:magic   <B> 12

     1221 Free















                             page 10
 
         _________________________________________

         WARNING

         NEVER  disconnect the Disk Interface from
         the  Spectrun whilst  the power  is still
         switched on.

         NEVER  leave a disk in the drive with the
         door  closed while the  power is switched
         on or off.
         _________________________________________

2.2 Auto-boot

SPECTRUM 128 : The Spectrum 128 cannot use this facility.

On power up or after a Reset (assuming the System switch is in the
normal  position, see Section  3)  you are  automatically in TRDOS
and  drive A is always  selected by the system.  TRDOS will try to
load  a BASIC program called "boot". If  there is no disk in drive
A, or the drive  door is  open or  the disk  does not  contain the
BASIC  program "boot", then the normal prompt  as in Section 2.1.8
is displayed.

Having  a disk in the  drive with the drive  door closed  when the
Spectrum power  is turned  on may  corrupt the  disk, particularly
those  drives with permanently loaded heads. It is recommended the
following procedures should be used for auto-boot:
     (1) Power up the Spectrum.
     (2) Load disk with BASIC program "boot" into drive A.
     (3) Reset the computer as described in Section 3.1.


2.3 Auto check of drive specification

When TRDOS starts up, it automatically checks the specification of
Drive  A. This  assumes that  you have  applied good  practice and
switched on the drives before or at the same time as the computer.

TRDOS adjusts to meet  the step  rate of  the drive.  This ensures
that  the faster  step rate  of modern  drives  is fully utilised.
TRDOS also checks to match the drive specification of either 40 or
80 track, single or double sided.

These  tests will be carried out even if no disk is present in the
drive.  If more than one drive is connected then these too will be
checked when each particular drive is first addressed.










                              page 11
 
2.4 "40" and "80" commands

Some of the older 40 track drives do not have an end stop and as a
consequence  the auto check may not work. That is, TRDOS thinks it
is an 80 track drive. The "40" command informs the system that the
currently selected drive is actually a 40 track drive, eg:

     40 <ENTER>

For  those 40/80 track switchable disk drives, it is possible that
you  switch from one position to the other after TRDOS has checked
the specification. You must tell TRDOS that you have switched over
by entering the "40" or the "80" command as appropriate, eg:

     80 <ENTER>


2.5 Using other interfaces

The  Disk Interface is designed to be compatible with all official
Sinclair peripherials such as Interface 1 and Microdrives. It will
also  work with most other add-ons available on the market, simply
by plugging them into the  connector  on  the  rear  of  the  Disk
Interface.

There  are a few add-on  units which use a   ROM that competes for
space in  the memory  with TRDOS.  If you  have such  an interface
connected, and  unless that  interface is  switched off,  you must
first  switch off the Disk Interface  by pulling the System switch
to the off position (Section 3.2).



























                              page 12
 
3    THE SYSTEM SWITCH

The System  switch is on the left-hand  side of the Disk Interface
(see Diagram 1).  It  is  a  three  position  switch.  For  normal
operation the switch  should be at  position 2. Position  1 is the
reset position, and 3 is the off position.

SPECTRUM 128 : The  System switch  must  be at the off position.

Normally when operating in TRDOS  the  switch  should  be  in  the
centre position. You  will  recall  that  in  Section  2.1.6  (for
SPECTRUM  & PLUS), the switch was in the centre, number 2 position
on power up. This enable TRDOS to take control.

To  change from TRDOS  to SOS and  back again (Section  5) is done
without moving the switch.
* SOS stands for Standard Operating System.

3.1 Reset

SPECTRUM 128 : Do not  use the System switch to reset the Spectrum
               128. Use the reset button  on the computer instead.

The reset facility is incorporated  in  the  Disk  Interface.  Its
function is to perform a  complete  system  reset.  The  practical
effect  is as if  the Spectrum had  been switched off  and then on
again. All  you need to  do to effect  a reset is  push the switch
away  from you  to position  1 and  then return  it to  the centre
again.

The screen will  go blank  for a  second, at  the same  time TRDOS
again takes over and you will see the display as in Section 2.1.8.

After a  Reset  the  normal  power  on  RAMTOP  is  restored,  all
variables and memory are cleared. It is therefore a very quick and
easy  method of ensuring that all effects and data from a previous
operation are removed and the Spectrum wiped clean.

The Reset also provides  a  quick  method  of  changing  from  one
activity to another  provided that  none of  the existing  data is
required.

3.2 The off position

SPECTRUM 128 : Always set the System switch at this position.

As mentioned in  Section 2.5, there  are a few  add-on units which
use  a  ROM that competes  for space in the  memory with TRDOS. If
you have such an interface connected, and unless that interface is
switched off,  the System switch must be  in the off position when
power is applied.






                              page 13
 
4    QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE

COMMAND        FUNCTION                                    SECTION

*"a:"     set default to drive A                               5.4

*"b:"     set default to drive B                               5.4

*"c:"     set default to drive C                               5.4

*"d:"     set default to drive D                               5.4

40        inform TRDOS that default drive is 40 track          2.4

80        inform TRDOS that default drive is 80 track          2.4

CAT       display the disk directory                           7.1

CAT#      print the disk directory                             7.3

CLOSE#    closing a serial/random access file                 13

COPY      copying files from one drive to another              8.1

COPY s    copying files in a single drive system               8.2

COPY b    backup disk in a single drive system                 8.2

ERASE     delete a file from the disk                          9.2

LIST      display details of disk contents                     7.2

LIST#     print details of disk contents                       7.2

LOAD      load a program from the disk                        10.2

INPUT#    read from serial/random access file                 13

MERGE     combine Basic program from disk with one in RAM     10.3

MOVE      reorganise and pack together the files on a disk     9.3

NEW       change the existing name of a file                   9.1

OPEN#     opening a stream for a serial/random access file    13

PEEK      read a sector of a file from disk to RAM            14.1

POKE      store data in RAM to a sector of a file             14.2

PRINT#    writing a serial/random access file                 13






                              page 14
 
COMMAND                  FUNCTION                          SECTION

RANDOMIZE USR 15616      go to TRDOS from SOS                  5.2

RANDOMIZE USR 15619      call TRDOS commands from SOS          5.3

RETURN    return to SOS from TRDOS                             5.1

RUN       load and run a program from the disk                10.2

SAVE      save a program to the disk                          10.1

VERIFY    verify a program saved on disk                      10.1



The table above is a summary of TRDOS commands. Before using these
commands  you are  advised to  read the  relevant sections  of the
manual.

Where applicable, the  commands shown  are Spectrum  keywords (for
SPECTRUM &  PLUS) obtained in the normal  SOS fashion. Some of the
commands require  additional details and these  will be dealt with
in the specific sections.

































                              page 15
 
5    COMMAND SYNTAX

TRDOS is flexible and you can access the disk system:
     (a) directly from TRDOS
     (b) Direct Entry from Spectrum SOS and
     (c) from within a BASIC
     (d) from within a machine code program.

Whenever you are in  TRDOS  you  will  see  the  prompt  of  drive
designation plus the arrow. This will be referred as TRDOS prompt,
eg:
     A>
     B>

According to  the  operation  just  finished  the  prompt  may  be
followed by a further part of a TRDOS command, eg:
     A>RUN "boot"

TRDOS  commands may be entered directly after the TRDOS prompt. If
the  prompt is followed by a previous command, you must remove the
old command using the DELETE [Caps shift 0] key.


5.1 Changing from TRDOS to SOS

To change  to SOS  the RETURN  command is  used. In  the following
example the words in []  are  explanation  and  not  part  of  the
syntax.

     A>                          [TRDOS prompt on screen]
     A>RETURN                    [Y pressed - now on screen]
     (C) Sinclair Copyright ..   [ENTER pressed - now on screen]

Please note  that the ENTER key is  pressed to complete the RETURN
command.  Unless otherwise stated, this will apply throughout this
manual, even ENTER is not shown.


5.2 Changing from SOS to TRDOS

To  change from SOS to  TRDOS when the K  cursor is shown requires
the following entry:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15616

This  is obtained by using the keyword on the letter T (RANDOMIZE)
to  be followed by the E mode letter L (USR) and then the numbers.
As in the example in Section 5.1, the ENTER key must be pressed to
complete the command.

If  only one drive is fitted then this will return you to drive A.
However, if more  than one drive  is fitted then  the command will
return you to the drive which was last selected (see Section 5.4).





                              page 16
 
Although  no longer displayed the program  is still in memory and,
after  executing certain TRDOS commands, such as a disk catalogue,
you can return to SOS and LIST to display the program.


5.3 Calling TRDOS from SOS and BASIC programs

The syntax  of the command is the same  at all times, but a prefix
must  be used if the command is called from SOS or from a program.
When the command  is entered  directly from  SOS, it  executes the
command, and returns to SOS. In this case the prefix nust be:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM:

For example:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: CAT "B:"

The use  of 15619  instead of  15616 retains  control in  SOS. The
CATaloge action is to be taken on Drive B (see Section 5.5).

Unless the command  performs  an  over-riding  function,  such  as
RUNning a program,  it will  terminate its  action with  the drive
prompt  if made from  TRDOS or the  Sinclair OK if  made from SOS,
e.g.
     A>CAT <ENTER>          results in the prompt A> on completion
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: CAT <ENTER>       results in OK.

Although it is  possible to execute  commands from SOS,  it is not
recommended. Firstly, it is far less likely to lead to disaster if
all actions are taken from  within  TRDOS.  Secondly,  the  actual
typing  required is  considerably  less,  and thirdly, the current
default drive is displayed which  can  help  to  avoid  the  silly
mistakes which lead to loss of valuable data.

When TRDOS  commands are included in a  BASIC program they must be
prefixed with:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM:

In  addition, the command  must be the  last item in  a line. When
writing a  program or converting one to  run from disk  instead of
cassette the rule you  must  obey  is  "The  TRDOS  command  which
finishes the line". For example:

Cassette program line
     10 INK 7: PAPER 1: LOAD "" CODE: GOSUB 500:
        CLS: PRINT "Press any key"

Converted to disk
     10 INK 7: PAPER 1: RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: LOAD
        "TITLE" CODE
     20 GOSUB 500: CLS: PRINT "Press any key"

Note  how the empty "" cannot be used for the disk. In addition to
the TRDOS command finishing line 10 we must insert the title under
which the code has been saved.



                              page 17
 
5.4  Default drive selection

The default drive is the one which will be accessed by any command
which  does not specify the drive to be used. On power up or after
a system reset the default drive is always A.

TRDOS supports  up to 4  drives, designated as  A, B, C  and D. To
change the default drive the command format is:
     *"drive:"

where drive is the designated drive A, B, C or D. For example:
     *"B:"      to change default to drive B
     *"a:"      to change default to drive A

NOTE:  The command can use either upper or lower case to designate
the drive although  the screen  display will  always be  a capital
letter before the arrow.

Having changed the  default from say  A to B,  all future commands
will access drive B unless told otherwise.

If  only one drive is fitted the screen designation remains A> and
the flexible working of multi drives demonstrated in this manual
does not apply.

5.5 Temporary drive selection

On  occasion it is desirable to remain in default to one drive but
want  to access another drive. The syntax  for this is a suffix to
the command showing  the required  drive. The  suffix is  like the
default change but without the star, e.g.
     "a:"    or    "B:"    or    "c:"    or    "D:"

An example of the full statement from SOS would be:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: LOAD "b:program"

This ensures that "program" is loaded from drive A irrespective of
which is the current default drive, including B.

From TRDOS with default drive A the command would be:
     LOAD "b:program"

This  would load "program" from drive A but leave default in drive
A for further TRDOS operations.













                              page 18
 

6    FORMATTING A DISK

A  disk must be formatted  before it can be  used by the computer.
This means that  the  sectors  on  each  track  must  be  checked,
identified  and marked electronically by TRDOS. From then on TRDOS
will keep track of what it has stored where on the disk.

TRDOS contains the disk  formatting  routine,  and  no  additional
software  needs to be loaded. Formatting can be carried cut at any
time, even with a program in memory.

To  format a disk,  insert it in  the default drive  and close the
door.  Type the keyword FORMAT [E  shift, symbol shift 0] followed
by the  disk title in quotes, the title  can be up to 8 characters
long, in upper or lower case including spaces. e.g.
     FORMAT "DISCONE"

Press ENTER  to complete the command and  sit back. The time taken
by  TRDOS to  mark the  sectors varies  between single  and double
sided, 40 and 80 track drives. If the drives are double sided then
both sides will be formatted automatically. When finished the
screen will display:
     DISCONE
     624/624   or    1264/1264   or    2544/2544
     A>

This display shows the  disk  title  followed  by  the  number  of
sectors formatted and secondly  the  maximum  possible  number  of
sectors for the  particular disk  format. If  the first  number is
less than the second you have a faulty disk.

The maximum number  of  sectors  varies  according  to  the  drive
specification. Track 0  is always  used by  the system  leaving 39
tracks on a SS 40 track, 79 on a DS 40 or SS 80 track and 159 on a
DS  80 track. At 16 sectors per track  we get 624, 1264 or 2544 as
the maximum number possible (see also Section 1.2).


6.1  Format as single sided

There are occasions when you wish  to  format  a  disk  as  single
sided. If the drive is  only  a  single  sided  drive  no  special
formatting  is  required,  just  use  the  standard  TRDOS  FORMAT
command.

If the drive is double sided then the first character of the title
of the disk must be "$", e.g.
     FORMAT "$DUMPER"

After  you have pressed ENTER and the formatting has finished, the
display will be:
     $DUMPER
     624/624   or    1264/1264   dependant upon 40 or 80 track
     A>



                              page 19
 
7    DISK CATALOGUE

7.1  Displaying a catalogue

There  are two commands for displaying the contents on a disk. The
first  and most commonly used is the CAT command. The other is the
LIST command.

Both the CAT and the  LIST  commands  can  be  accessed  whilst  a
program is held  in memory.  The CAT  command displays  the title,
type and sector size  of  the  files  and  is  adequate  for  most
purposes. The LIST  command displays  the catalogue  with extended
information, and is ideal for program analysis.

The syntax to obtain the catalogue of the disk is:
     CAT      or
     LIST

You  may display the catalogue of a disk other then the one in the
default drive, eg:
     CAT "b:"       or
     LIST "b:"

The command may also be called from SOS, eg:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15616: REM: CAT "a:" or 
     RANDOMIZE USR 15616: REM: LIST "a:"

For the CAT  command, the  information that  will be  displayed on
screen is:
  Disk title
  No. of files
  No. of deleted files
  Drive: File title: type of file: size of file [in 2 columns]
  No. of free sectors
  TRDOS prompt

For example:
     Title: ACCOUNTS    Meaning
     4 file(s)          The disk in drive A
     1 Del. file(s)     4 files + 1 deleted 
     A: HOME    <B> 12  B=BASIC program         12 sectors    (3K)
     A: HOME1   <C> 6   C=machine code           6 sectors  (1.5K)
     A: HOME2   <#> 13  #=serial/random access  13 sectors (3.25K)
     A: HOME3   <D> 7   D=data array             7 sectors (1.75K)

Free 2503                2544-38=2506, deleted file occupies 3
                         sectors leaving 2503 free.
A>                       default drive is A.

If the number  of files  to  be displayed  is  more  than  30  the
"scroll?" will  appear.  The  normal  Spectrum  key  presses  will
continue the display. "N" or "BREAK" will terminate the listing.





                              page 20
 
An example of the resulting display of the LIST command is:

     Title Poolperm       Disk Drive: B
     4 file(s)            80 Track D. Sided
     1 Del. File(s)       Free Sector 2480
     File Name            Start Length Line
     POOLCALC <B> 5       00298 01200  25
     Pooll    <C> 32      32768 08000
     Poolfact <#> 7       01780 01780
     Poolbase <D> 8       30000 32000

The  display is showing all the usual details of the disk, that it
is  in drive B, that it is 80  track double sided with 4 files and
2480 sectors (about 620K bytes)  free.  In  addition  to  the  CAT
details  of title, type and size we now have the starting address,
length and , if BASIC, the start line of the programs.

7.2  Printing a catalogue

It is often  desirable to know  the contents of  the disks without
using the computer to display the catalogue every time.

The paper and  pencil  is an  obvious  method,  although  somewhat
inconvenient and  very often prone  to  error. TRDOS allows you to
produce a hard copy  of the  disk catalogue,  assuming you  have a
printer connected to your system.

The  following example is based upon using Interface 1. The normal
SOS procedure  of  opening  a  stream  must  be  initiated  before
printing. This  requires returning to SOS  if currently working in
TRDOS and the stream is not already open.

Once in SOS the usual Interface 1 syntax can be entered, eg:
FORMAT "T"; 9600 : OPEN #4; "T"

Once the stream  is open  a return  to TRDOS  is preferable  as it
provides better control and less typing (RANDOMIZE prefix). Having
returned  to TRDOS the CAT  # and LIST #  commands are exactly the
same as the CAT and LIST commands above, eg:
     CAT #4         will  send  the  catalogue  to the printer via
                    stream #4.

     LIST #4, "b:"  will  send the  extended catalogue of  drive B
                    to the printer.

The Sinclair manual deals with the use of streams 0 to 15. Streams
0 to  3 are  reserved for  the Spectrum.  The actual  stream used,
between  4 and 15, does not matter. Whatever stream is opened must
be the one used in CAT # or LIST # commands.








                              page 21
 
8    COPYING FILES

There are three commands for file copying:
     COPY    - for normal file copying
     COPY s  - for single drive system file copying
     COPY b  - for single drive system backup.

The basic  element  of the syntax  is COPY.  This is  the Spectrum
keyword on the Z key. The basic syntax is:
     COPY "new_file", "old_file" type

The  syntax required follows SOS practice  by putting both the new
and old  file titles between  quotes and specifying  the file type
using SOS  keywords. The four different  types of  files and their
file type are:
     BASIC programm
     machine code programm      CODE
     data array file            DATA
     serial/random access file  #

Note that the BASIC program has a blank file type.

All  commands must  have the  precise form  of the  name including
upper  and lower case and  spaces as well as  the file type. Hense
the best thing to do is to have a CAT display.

One  important point to remember is that whenever 2 titles have to
be quoted, e.g. for the COPY or for the NEW commands it is the new
title which is quoted first. In addition, the type does not follow
the new title, because it is same as the old file.


8.1  Copying to the same disk

Having put the disk containing tge file(s) to be copied into drive
A  (the actual drive used is unimportant) the first thing to do is
a  CAT of the disk. We have to tell TRDOS the title of the file to
be copied and the title under which the copy should be saved. Eg:
COPY "Vat69","Whisky" CODE

Note that  the new and the old file  titles are in quotes, and the
separated  by a  comma. Because  this is  a mythical  machine code
program  related to alcoholic beverages we  must add the file type
CODE. Press  ENTER and the command will  disappear for a couple of
seconds.  When the TRDOS prompt reappears there will be no obvious
change.  By doing another CAT command we will now find the display
includes the new file Vat69 <C>.










                              page 22
 
You  cannot save two files on the same disk with identical titles.
Identical  means exactly the same. It is possible to have the same
name but  with one in upper case and  the other in lower case. One
can be a BASIC program and the other a machine code program, eg:

  STOCKFILE <C>       Acceptable because the file types are
  STOCKFILE <B>       different

  PURCHASE  <B>       Acceptable because the last letter is
  PURCHASe  <B>       caps on one.

Using this principle it would  have  been  possible  to  COPY  our
previous example without going from the general term "whisky" to a
particular brand, eg:
     COPY "WHISKY", "Whisky" CODE   or
     COPY "WHYSKY2" ,"WHYSKY" CODE

So far we have considered COPYing  only  to  the  same  disk.  The
procedure  for COPYing to another disk depends upon whether or not
you have a second disk drive.


8.2  Single drive copying and backup

If only one disk drive is available the normal COPY command cannot
be  used. Both the  "COPY s"   and  the  "COPY b"  command are for
single drive system.

The first, "COPY s"  is used to  copy  one file  from one  disk to
another disk using the same drive. Whereas the second, "COPY b" is
used  to backup a disk  to another disk, that  is, copying all the
files.

Here are some examples of the "COPY s" command:
     COPY s "Wines"           or
     COPY s "BEER"CODE

where both  "Wines" and "BEER"CODE are  existing files. Notice the
difference.   Previously  we  entered  the   new  name  in  quotes
immediatly after the  prompt.  Now  we  are  telling  TRDOS   what
program  to copy and so the existing name goes in quotes after the
"COPY s".

To make  sure you haven't got the wrong  disk in the drive you are
prompted  to insert the disk and press Y. Having read the disk the
program prompts  you to replace it with  the second disk and enter
the new name under which the program will be copied.

The practice of making  a backup  copy of  all programs  cannot be
over emphasised.  With cassette  based operations  this is  a time
consuming activity. To be of value the program must be copied, the
tape rewound and then verified. This can be quite a lenghtly
procedure!




                              page 23
 
With TRDOS  and disk it  can take less  than a minute  to COPY and
then if desired  reLOAD the program  to actually check  that it is
OK. Essentually backup of a program consists of making a COPY onto
another disk kept purely for backup purposes.

The "COPY b" command operates as an extension of the "COPY s". The
routine  is run by entering the command "COPY b". From then on the 
screen  prompts as to changing the disk and what keys to press are
straightforword.

8.3  Twin drive copy and backup

Copying to another drive automatically  means  that  you  will  be
copying to another disk. Although the interchange could take place
between  any combination of two drives we will use drives A and B.
It  will be apparent from the  syntax how other combinations would
be entered.

Enter the keyword  COPY followed by  the two titles  in quotes but
this time include  the  temporary  drive  indicator.  Being  on  a
different disk, we can use the same title if we wish in the second
disk, eg:
      COPY "A:Whisky", "b:Whisky"

Although default drive is A we are copying from the disk in B to A
and using the  same title which is  not in use on  disk A. Had the
disks been reversed in the two drives then we would have had:
      COPY "B:Whisky", "A:Whisky"

thus copying the file from drive A to drive B.

The backup operation is much simplier using twin drive system. The
disk  to be copied is  placed in one drive  and the receiving disk
(blank and  formatted or  partially used)  is inserted  in another 
drive. Any  drives can be used. We will  use drive A as the source
and  drive B as the recipient. The  command syntax is similar to a
single file  copy with a  "*" (the computer  jargon is "wildcard")
replacing a specific file title, eg:
     COPY "B:*", "A:*"

Having  entered the command TRDOS will  do the rest. Provided that
the file names are not  duplicated  and  the  receiving  disk  has
sufficient space the  operation will  end with  the return  of the
prompt A>.

If a file  name is  duplicated then  the error  message "Overwrite
existing file? Y/N" appears. Enter  "Y"  and  the o verwrite  will
occur.  Enter "N" and the COPY will continue but ignore that file.
This  allows you to later change and COPY one file if the name has
been duplicated on two different files.

The advantade of the "*" COPY is the speed compared with having to
enter each file separately.




                              page 24
 
9    RENAMING, ERASING FILES AND DISK HOUSEKEEPING

9.1  Renaming a file - the NEW command

The ability to change the title of any file on the disks in one of
the most  flexible commands  at your  disposal. Title  changing is
invaluable  for program development. In  addition, you can correct
typing errors (they do happen) in the titles of programs.

Unlike  other TRDOS commands the disk must be in the default drive
and this has  to be  drive A.  This is  also one  of the  few disk
commands for which you need to be in TRDOS rather than issuing the 
command from the SOS.

We are therefore going to be  in  TRDOS  using  drive  A  and  the
Spectrum keyword  NEW [the A key]. First do  a CAT pf the disk, so
that the title of the file to be changed is displayed.

Now  enter the keyword NEW followed by the new title (in quotes as
always) and then the  existing title  and the  two separated  by a
comma, eg:
     NEW "boot", "prog"

Press ENTER and the prompt will disappear for a couple of seconds.
When  it reappears nothing will  seem  to have changed. Repeat the
CAT and  the  listing  will  be  redisplayed  showing  "boot"  has
replaced "prog".


9.2  Erasing a file - the ERASE command

If  a file on the disk becomes obsolete and no longer required, it
may be erased. The  command keyword  is ERASE  and is  obtained by
going into  E mode and holding down  the symbol shift and pressing 
the 7 key, eg:
     ESARE "oldprog"
     ERASE "oblsole"DATA

We  now ENTER the command. A CAT when the prompt reappears after a
couple of  seconds will  confirm the  file has  gone and  the fact
recorded in the heading of  the  CAT  as  the  number  of  file(s)
deleted.















                              page 25
 
9.3  Packing disk space - the MOVE command

When a  file is erased, the sectors it  used to occupy have yet to
be released for other files. To retrieve the "lost" sectors by the
erased files we  use the MOVE  command.  This Spectrum keyword  is
obtained by  going into E mode and  pressing both Symbol Shift and
key 6, eg:
     MOVE or
     MOVE "b:"

Although the latter  example  is  possible  it  is  perferable  to
execute this with default  set  to  the  drive  in  which  we  are
working. This is a command which most inevitably must be used from
within  TRDOS rather than from SOS. Having gone inro TRDOS we have
performed  a CAT to examine the  disk, possibly done some erasing,
and are now finishing with a MOVE to reclaim the space for use.

The MOVE command  itself does  all the  work in  re-organizing the
disk  and its directory. When completed TRDOS prompt reappears. If
CAT is now  entered, the listing  will show 0  file(s) deleted and
the increased number of free sectors.

Like all  machine code instructions the MOVE  is fast but the time
taken  varies according to the number and size of the files stored
and deleted and their whereabouts  on  the  disk.  To  reduce  the
waiting  time to a minimum it is good practice to MOVE immediately
after making  any deletions. This has the  positive advantage that
it  avoids multiple  readjustements and  the disk always indicates
precisely what is spare. It  is  ready  to  load  to  its  maximum
without having to stop and undertake housekeeping first.



























                              page 26
 
10   SAVING, VERYFYING, LOADING, RUNNING AND MERGING PROGRAMS

The syntax for all  of these commands are similar. As you will see
these commands  have the same or similar  syntax as thise used for
cassette baset system.

All these  commands operate on files. A file  on the disk can be a
BASIC program,  a machine  code program,  a data  array file  or a
serial/random  access file. The  loading and saving  of data array
file  is covered in Section 12, and serial/random access files are
covered  in Section 13. This section covers both BASIC and machine
code programs.

During all five operations of SAVE/VERIFY/LOAD/RUN/MERGE the Break
key  can be used to abort the command.  If there is no disk in the
drive  the command will be aborted abd the Error Message "No disk"
will be displayed on screen.  Similarly,  if  the  disk  does  not
contain  the file,  then the  Error Message  "No file(s)"  will be
displayed.


10.1 The SAVE and VERIFY commands

The SAVE  command will  save a  program in  the Spectrum  onto the
disk.  A title of the program must be specified and is enclosed in
quotes.

For BASIC program, a  file type  is not  required. However  a line
number can  be specified after  the keyword LINE  for auto-run. If
the line number is not specified then the program will be run from
the first line. Eg:
    SAVE "homeacc"LINE 100
    SAVE "graph"LINE
    SAVE "A:design"

For a  machine code program, you must  specify the file type CODE,
followed by the starting  address and  the number  of bytes to be
saved. Eg:
    SAVE "Discount"CODE 47800, 955
    SAVE "B:Collec"CODE 32768, 4000

The VERIFY command tests  whether the  file saved  on the  disk is
exactly the same as that in memory. The VERIFY command may be used
to verify BASIC, machine-code programs and data array files. Eg:
    VERIFY "A:Design"
    VERIFY "Discount"CODE 47800, 955
    VERIFY "Money"DATA M()

if they are different, a Verify Error message will be displayed.








                              page 27
 
10.2 The LOAD or RUN commands

If a BASIC program is saved to auto-run from a line number, eg:
     SAVE "INTEREST"LINE25

then it will auto-run whichever command (LOAD or RUN) is used.

If  the BASIC program is not saved to auto-run then LOAD will load
and LIST whereas RUN will  load and RUN a non-auto program.

For exaple:
     LOAD "INTEREST"
     RUN "desing"

As you might  expect  TRDOS  will  inform  you   of  "Insufficient
memory" if you attempt  to LOAD  or RUN  a program  which requires
more memory than  the Spectrum  has available.  This can  arise if
RAMTOP has been set too low.

If you  enter either LOAD or RUN without  the filename, TRDOS will
load or run the BASIC program "boot".

As can  be seen in  the examples above  the syntax is  the same as
Spectrum BASIC. For the machine code programs, they  can be loaded
to the same address from which they were saved, eg:
     LOAD "A:SALECALC"CODE

or  loaded to  a different  address by  specifying in  the loading
instructions, eg:
     LOAD "margin"CODE 51000

When running a machine code program the auto-run address should be
the same as the strating address of the program, eg:
     RUN "Discound"CODE 47800

provided the  code is meant to auto-run  from 47800 on loading all
will be well.

The alternative is to  use  a  two   line  loader,  eg,  SAVE  the
following program on disk as say "DCTLOAD"LINE 10

     10 RANDOMIZE USR 15619:REM:LOAD "Dsicount"CODE 47800
     20 RANDOMIZE USR 47838

To run the program you now enter RUN "DCTLOAD" which will load the
machine code and the "run it" fom 47838.

The two line loader is necessary because the TRDOS command must be
the last entry in a line.








                              page 28
 
10.3 The MERGE command

The TRDOS  merge is the  same as the  SOS merge. It  uses the same
keywords [E mode symbol  shift T]  and serves  the same purpose to
merge in the  Spectrum memory a  BASIC program from  the disk with
one already in memory.

For example:
     MERGE "subroul"
     MERGE "B:funct2"















































                              page 29
 
11   TRANSFERRING CASSETTE BASED PROGRAMS

If  the cassette program was written by you then the copying of it
to disk presents few problems. You load your program from cassette
in  SOS as usual. Once  in Spectrum the program may be saved to  a
disk by the direct keyboard entry. eg:

     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: SAVE "xxx"           or
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: SAVE "xyz"CODE NNNN, BBB

Many  other programs can be copied using the Utility Disk TAPECOPY
program (see Appendix).

The syntax  for these  programs may  require conversion  to ensure
that it will  run  under  TRDOS.  For  other  programs  which  are
difficult  or impossible  to convert  and run  on disk,  the Magic
button may be used.


11.1 Program conversion

Very ofter programs are  a mixture  of BASIC  and Machine  code to
improve the  speed. The BASIC element can  vary from a simple code
loader to a more complex interface between the code and the user.

For those programs  which  use  the  BASIC  as  an  interface  the
conversion to  use  TRDOS  is  relatively  straightforward.  Other
programs  may require extensive "hacking" to be able to alter them
to run under TRDOS. Some difficult ones may require the use of the
Magic button  (Section 11.3) as  the only means  of overcoming the
problem.

You must be able to get access to all the LOAD or SAVE commands in
the  original BASIC program require changing, so the first step is
to LIST the BASIC program.

The  technique used will vary according to the individual program.
In some cases the LOAD or  SAVE  attributes  of  the  program  are
minimal and a quick scan of the LISTing is all that is required to
locate  the commands. Other programs can have several LOAD or SAVE
options. With these the  simplest  way  is  to  step  through  the
program a line  at a time  looking for LOAD  or SAVE instructions.
Each  time one is found the syntax modification is the addition of
the usual prefix, i.e. RANDIMIZE USR 15619: REM:

This  is inserted in  front of the  existing LOAD or  SAVE in  the
program.

We must  also bear  in mind  two other  points. Firstly  the TRDOS
command  must be the last item in a program line, and secondly the
drive location must be considered.  The  first  point  will  often
require  some  slight  modification  to  the  line  numbering  and
contents  of the lines. The following example will illustrate both
these points:



                              page 30
 
EXISTING PROGRAM:

    500 IF X=5 THEN PRINT "Name"; N$: SAVE N$ DATA C$ ():
        VERIFY N$ DATA C$ (): GOSUB 700
    505 IF X=V THEN GOSUB 800: INPUT "Title"; T$: SAVE T$: SAVE
        T$ CODE 50000,575
    506 ....... More of the program

Assuming the files are saved to the default drive.

NEW PROGRAM:                          COMMENTS

    500 IF X=5 THEN INPUT "Name"; N$: RANDOMIZE USR 15619:
        REM: SAVE N$ DATA C$ ()
    502 GOSUB 700
    504 IF X=V THEN GOSUB 800: INPUT "Title";T$: RANDOMIZE USR
        15619: REM: SAVE T$
    505 RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: SAVE T$ CODE 50000,575
    506 ....... program continued

The line  adjustment will vary  from prigram to program . Here the
unused  lines 502 and 504 were sufficient to allow the essential 1
line  per TRDOS command. On occasion it may be necessary to adjust
other lines not involved  directly  with  the  TRDOS  commands  to
create sufficient space.  At all  times the  program flow  must be
watched.  It is not uncommon  to find that as  a result of program
development another part of the  program  is  jumping  to  a  line
number which you are now using.

As a summary, the rules for conversion are:

(1) TRDOS command must be the last statement in a line.
(2) Only the prefix RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: needs to be added to
    all existing LOAD and SAVE commands.
(3) If more  that one drive is used then make sure the right drive
    is used.
(4) All files must have filename.
(5) Check the program flow when adding intermediate line number.


11.2 The Magic button

The Magic button is  situated at  the rear  of the  Disk Interface
(see Diagram 1). The purpose  of  the  Magic  button  is  to  save
cassette based programs and run on disk without any conversion.

There are  many programs which have been  written in such a manner
that it is  either difficult or  impossible to convert  and run on 
disk. These may be those programs with sophisticated protection or
those  which SAVE and LOAD data files for the main program to use.
Because the sunstitution of  TRDOS  commands  in  not  possible  a
different approach is required.





                              page 31
 
For the latter  the program  is loaded  and data  file(s) created.
Instead of using the programs  own  SAVE  instructions  the  Magic
button is used to dump  the  whole  programs  and  files  to  disk.
Subsequent reloading means loading the complete package instead of
just a data file.

The minor  inconvenience  of  having  an  individual  tailor  made
version of  the complete  package for  each type  of data  file is
offset by the speed abd flexibility of TRDOS disk working.

A formatted blank disk should be set aside purely for this purpose
and when used MUST be in drive A. Assuming these are in order, the
following sequences show you the detailed operations (assuming you
are in TRDOS):

(1) Return to BASIC, by typing
          RETURN <ENTER>
(2) Pull the System switch to the off position.
(3) Clear the Spectrum by typing
          PRINT USR 0 <ENTER>
(4) Load and run program from cassette tape as normal.
(5) After the  program has been  loaded and is  running, press the
Magic button and release it promptly.

The computer  memory is  then dumped  to the  disk. The  memory is
stored as file(s) on the disk.

SPECTRUM & PLUS : only   one  file  will  be  created.  This  file
                  contains  the image of  the whole 48K  of RAM. A
                  CAT  of the disk  will reveal that  the title is
                  "@" abd the file type is CODE.

SPECTRUM 128  :   up  to  seven  files may  be saved  depending on
                  whether the pages on the upper 64k RAM are being 
                  used.  An example of the  disk catalogue after a
                  Magic button dump is:

     Title: test
     7 File(s)
     0 Del. File
     A:@       <C>192:@7      <C> 64
     A:@6      <C> 64:@4      <C> 64
     A:@3      <C> 64:@1      <C> 64
     A:@8      <C>  1

The "family" name if these files is "@".

To reload the file (for all Spectrum computers) the syntax changes
from the normal LOAD or RUN.  Instead  the  SOS  keyword  of  GOTO
[letter G] is used, eg:
     GOTO "@"CODE






                              page 32
 
The program can be renamed ir copied to another disk under its own
title and run by the GOTO command, eg:
     NEW "game1", "@"CODE
     COPY "B:game1", "A:@"CODE

When running "game1" and assuming the  disk  is  in  drive  A  the
syntax is:
     GOTO "game1"CODE

SPECTRUM 128 : it is possible to rename or copy all the files (one
               by one)  using  the  NEW  and  the  COPY  commands.
               Hovewer,  for your convenience,  a Utility program,
               MAGIC is supplied on  the  Utility  disk.  See  the
               Appendix for details. This Utility program may also
               be  used to erase a 'family"  of files saved by the
               Magic button.

Before you use the Magic button to save a program, you must ensure
that  the disk does not contain any file with the name "@" or "@1"
etc.

Some programs use a  non-standart  key  scan  routine.  For  these
programs it  will be necessary to make  the first character of the
disk title a "$", eg:
     GOTO "$game1"CODE

If the  program is  being checked  before copied  with a  title to
another disk  then the file title would  require the prefix "$" if
the key scan problem occours, eg:
     NEW "$game2", "@"CODE
     GOTO "$game2"CODE

During  the loading ot these files the screen display will contain
some random elements,  often a  number of  pixel lines  which look
something like  a visual  Morse transmission.  When it  clears the
program will run from where it was stopped.





















                              page 33
 
12    DATA ARRAY FILES

The  SOS syntax for LOADing or SAVEing a non string array entitled
Money is:
     LOAD "Money"DATA M() or
     SAVE "Movey"DATA M()

For a string array the addition of $ is required, eg:
     LOAD "Money"DATA M$()

Like most of  the TRDOS commands  the LOADing and  SAVEing of data
arrays is achieved by  using SOS  Basic syntax  with a  prefix and
possibly  a  drive  indicator. It  is seldom  that data arrays are
likely to be handled from TRDOS.

The  nature of the arrays is such that they will be saved from and
loaded to a running program. The SOS syntax for use within a BASIC
program would be:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: LOAD "Money"DATA M() or
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: SAVE "Money"DATA M()

Note:  This syntax assumes that the  default drive is either fixed
as drive A. If you have a twin drive system, the alternative would
be  to assume that  the data disk  is always loaded  into the same
drive, say  B whilst the main program  and default drive remain in
A. In this case a temporary drive indicator would be used, eg:
     RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: LOAD "B:Money"DATA M()

When COPYing, ERASEing,  or NEWing  a DATA  file the  command must
always  terminate with the designation of the file type, i.e. DATA
otherwise TRDOS  will assume that it is  looking for a BASIC file,
eg:
     COPY "a:Money"DATA, "B:Money"DATA
























                              page 34
 


13   SEQUENTIAL AND RANDOM ACCESS FILES

13.1 General description

Normal  data array files have been  discussed in the last section.
TRDOS  supports two additional types of data files, Sequential and
Random  Access. In order to use these two types of data files, you
must first  open a stream.  The Spectrum contains  16 streams. The
SOS  reserves the streams 0 to 3 for  its own use and streams 4 to
15  are available to  TRDOS. When a  stream for a  sequential or a
random access data file is opened, 336 bytes of RAM are used.

Both numeric and string  variables may  be stored in  a data file.
The  numeric variables are converted to strings by the computer. A
string is terminated (by the system) with a carriage retuen (ASCII
code 13).

A  sequential file stores the data serially rather like a cassette
tape.  In order to read a string towards the end of the file it is
necessary to start from very beginning if the file.

The random access file, on the other hand, stores data as a number
of  records. Any record in  these files may be  read or written by
specifying the record number. Therefore, to access the last record
is as quick as the first record.

The other TRDOS  commands for  drive selection,  copying, changing
titles etc all equally apply to these Sequential and Random access
files.  The only dufference is the type of file indicator which is
"#" instead of "CODE" or "DATA". Eg:
     COPY "B:phone", "A:phone"#
     NEW "newfile", "oldfile"#
     ERASE "namadd"#

Similar to the data array files, the  sequential and random access
files are seldomly handled directly from TRDOS. Hense the examples
that follow are assumed to be in a BASIC program.

13.2 Sequential files

A  sequential file may be opened either  for Write or Read but not
both at the same time. To open a file for Write the syntax is:
     OPEN stream_number, "filename",W

When a stream is open for Write the BASIC keyword PRINT is used to
WRITE data to that stream, eg:
     10 LET DOS = 15619
     20 RANDOMIZE USR DOS: REM: OPEN #4, "TEST",W
     30 PRINT #4; "This is a test line"
     40 RANDOMIZE USR DOS: REM: CLOSE #4

Notice the use of "DOS" instead  of  typing  in  "15619"  and  the
closure of the file.




                              page 35
 
The string  in line 30 will  be saved in file  "TEST" on the disk.
Had  the file not been  closed the data would  have been lost. Any
closed  file may be re-opened for further Write action by Reading,
changing and re-saving under a new name.

To open a file for READ the syntax is:
     OPEN stream_number, "filename",R

With  the stream opened for READ the  SOS keyword INPUT is used to
Read data from this stream, eg:
     10 LET DOS = 15619
     20 RANDOMIZE USR DOS :REM :OPEN #7, "TEST",R
     30 INPUT #7; A$

The data file "TEST" will be loaded into A$ from the disk.


13.3 Random access files

A  random access file  is a data  file which contains  a number of
records numbered  from 0 onwards.  The length of  the records (max
254 bytes each )  is chosem  and allocated  when first opening the
file.

The  record is stored as a single string. Any string less than the
allocated  record length is stored,  left justified and terminated
by a  carriage return (ASCII code 13).  The remaining bytes of the
record  are not defined. Any string  longer than the record length
will  be truncated to the allocated  length and stored without the
carriage return terminator.

When a  Random Access file is first  opened TRDOS will allocate 16
sectors (approximately 4K) to the  file.  This  will  be  expanded
automatically as the length of the file excees 4K.

To open a file for random access, the command syntax is:
     OPEN stream_number, "filename"RND, record_length

To write a record to a  file  the  command  syntax  is  (RANDOMIZE
prefix is not required for PRINT and INPUT):
     PRINT stream_number; record_number, variabel_name

For example:
     100 RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: OPEN #8, "Address"RND, 100
     150 PRINT #8; 72,D$

Stream 8  has been  opened for  the file  "Address" in  which each
record  has been allocated 100 bytes. The contents of D$ have been
put in record number 72 of the file.

Unlike  the sequential file, you may read and write while the file
is opened, To read a record from a file the command syntax is:
     INPUT stream_number; (record_number), variable name




                              page 36
 
For example:
     100 RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: OPEN #12, "TEST1"RND, 20
     110 PRINT #12; 20, A$
     :
     :
     570 INPUT #12; (15), A$
     :
     :
     990 RANDOMIZE USR 15619: REM: CLOSE #12
     999 END

In  line 570, the record in record number 15 (remember this is the
16th record) is read  and loaded  into the  variable A$.  When all
operations with a file are completed the stream must be closed, as
shown  in line  990. The  contents will  be lost  if the  power is
turned off before the stream is closed.

It  is acceptable for a record to comprise more than one variable.
It is the responsibility of  the  program  to  link  together  the
strings of those variables for the write  operation. Similarly the
program must  split up the string after  the read operation if the
data is to be split into separated variables again.



































                              page 37
 

14   DIRECT SECTOR READ/WRITE

In addition to three types of data files described in the last two
sections, TRDOS also offers direct sector (one sector contains 256
bytes) read/write of a file on the disk.


14.1 The PEEK command

The PEEK command allows you to read any part of a file on the disk
and transfer the data to RAM. You may only read a sector at a time
and the data can be  transferred  to  any  location  in  RAM.  The
command syntax is:
     PEEK "filename"Buffer_address, Sector_numbers

Eg:
     PEEK "Record" 30023,5

In  this example, the 5th sector of  the file "Record" is read and
its content is written to RAM from address 30023.


14.2 The POKE command

The  POKE command allows you to write a sector of data from RAM to
any location  in a file on the disk.  The syntax is similar to the
PEEK command:
     POKE "filename"Buffer_address, Sector_number

Eg:
     POKE "B:OLD"30024, 10

In this example, a sector length of data starting from RAM address
30024  is written to the 10th sector of the file "OLD" in drive B.
As  this command changes the  content of the file  on the disk, it
must be used with care.





















                              page 38
 

15   MACHINE CODE PROGRAMMING

The inclusion of TRDOS  routines  in  machine  code  programs  are
relativey straightforward.

There are 3 elements required for the program:

(1) The machine code equivalent of the BASIC TRDOS command.
(2) The machine code routine to implement 1 above.
(3) The machine code routine to restore the system to its original
    state before calling and executing the command.

The actual memory locations used will depend upon the program as a
whole. For the  purpose  of  this  example  the  location  of  the
routines  will be at 49000 for the SAVE, at 49500 for the LOAD and
at 50000 for the instructions calling them. Thus item 1 will be at
either 49000 or 49500 and items 2 and 3 at 50000.

EXAMPLE:

Address     Code     Basic   Comment

49000       234      REM     Codes as in Appx A of Spectrum
49001        58       :      manual
49002       248      SAVE
49003        34       "
49004        69       E
49005       120       x
49006        97       a
49007       109       m      File name "Example"
49008       112       p
49009       108       l
49010       101       e
49011        34       "
49012        13      ENTER   Always end with ENTER

The  code for the LOAD commences at  49500 and is eaxctly the same
as above except that address 49502 will contain 239 (LOAD) instead
of 248 (SAVE).

These two  routines, LOAD, and  SAVE can be  located anywhere, but
the  initiator which we are locating at 50000 requires changing at
addresses  50007-50008 (Save  routine address)  and 50025  - 50026
(LOAD routine address) to point to the new addresses.













                              page 39
 
To relocate, the  initiator itself  requires reassembly.  For that
reason the Z80 mnemonics only are given below.

CHADD  EQU   23645         Location of SOS variable CHADD
       ORG   XXXXX         XXXX=address of this code
       LD    HL,(CHADD)    Start to save true CHADD
       LD    (TEMP), HL    Temporary store of true CHADD
       LD    HL,49000      Address of SAVE routine
       LD    (CHADD),HL    CHADD now points to our routine
       CALL  15363         ENTER TRDOS SAVE via chadd
       JP    BACK          Jump to program point from which
                           the whole routine was called
       LD    HL,(CHADD)    
       LD    (TEMP),HL     The routine for LOAD now repeats
       LD    HL,49500      the above with just the address
       LD    (CHADD),HL    changed.
       CALL  15363         
BACK   LD    HL,(TEMP)     Start to restore CHADD
       LD    (CHADD),HL    Reload original CHADD
       RET                 Return from where you came
TEMP                       Label allocating memory for
                           temporary storage

The whole routine  pointing to  both the  SAVE and  LOAD routines,
together with the  "return  to  point  of  entry"  ending  routine
occupies only 47 bytes.































                              page 40
 
16  ERROR MESSAGES

16.1 On-line messages

When you enter a  command in  TRDOS, the command  will be executed
provided it  is  valid.  If  the  command  is  not  one  of  those
recognised  by TRDOS (eq LOAD, RUN,  FORMAT etc) TRDOS will ignore
it. If there is a syntax error or an error occurs when the command
is executed,  an  error  message  will  be  displayed.  The  error
message and how they are caused are explained below.

(1)      No disk

There is no disk, or an unformatted disk in the drive or the drive
door is open.  The command is  displayed after the  prompt A>, you
may  insert a disk and/or close the  drive door and press ENTER to
execute the same command.

(2)      No file(s)

TRDOS cannod find the file on  the  disk.  This  error  will  also
appear if  any command  is used  which incorrectly  identifies the
file, eg:
      LOAD "TEST"CODE instead of LOAD "TEST"
      ERASE "DUMMY1"DATA instead of ERASE "DUMMY2"DATA

(3)      *ERROR*

This  will appear if  there is a  syntax error in  the command you
typed, such as:

      SAVE "CJ""
      ERASE

The error  in the SAVE command in the  extra " and the filename is
missing from the ERASE command.

(4)      Out of memory

This  message will  appear when  loading a  program from  disk and
there is insufficient memory left to accomodate it, and when using
the MOVE command if the  necessary  4K  byte  work  space  is  not
available.  Usually resetting  of the  computer will  overcome the
problems.

(5)      File exists

A file  with the same  name and type  that you have  tried to save
already exists on the disk.








                              page 41
 
(6)      Overwrite existing file ? (Y/N)

This  appears when copying all the files from one disk to another.
There is already a file  with  the  same  name  and  type  on  the
destination disk. You may enter "Y" to overwrite the existing file
or "N" to ignore that file.

(7)      Disk error
         Trk xx sec yy
         Retry,Abort,Ingnore?

This disk has a fault at track xx,sector yy as indicated. You have
three options,  you can type "R" to  re-try and often complete the
operation succsessfully,  "A" to abort the operation and return to
TRDOS  or "I" to ignore this sector  and continue with the rest of
the disk operations.

(8)      Write protect
         Trk xx, sec yy
         Retry,Abort,Ignore?

The disk  is write protected.  Similar to Disk  error above, there
are three options. However, there is no point to re-try unless you
change the disk or make it non-protected.

(9)      Verify Error

This may  appear when the  VERIFY  command  is  used. The  message
informs  that the file on the disk is  not the same as that in the
memory.

16.2 Error codes

All the above error messages only  appear when entered from TRDOS.
If  the command was  issued from SOS  or Machine Code  either as a
direct  entry or from within a program the message will not appear
on the screen. However,  they  are  stored  as  Code  in  the  Z80
Register Pair BC. The key to the code is:
    0 ----- No errors
    1 ----- No files
    2 ----- File exists
    3 ----- No space
    4 ----- Directory full
    5 ----- Record number overflow
    6 ----- No disk
    7 ----- Disk errors
    8 ----- Syntax errors
   10 ----- Stream already opened
   11 ----- Not disk file
   12 ----- Stream not open

To obtain the error  code  set  a  variable  equal  to  the  TRDOS
command.  The variable will take on the value of the error code on
completion of the TRDOS command.



                              page 42
 
Example 1:

     LET A=USR 15619: REM: CAT

Example 2:

A simple program illustrating the use of error code 1:

     10 CLEAR 65367
     20 LET ERR = USR 15619: REM: LOAD "COPY"CODE
     25 REM error code is returned in the variable ERR
     30 IF ERR = 1 THE CLS: PRINT AT 10, 1;"""COPY""CODE NOT
        ON DISK": STOP
     40 RANDOMIZE USR 32768
     50 RANDOMIZE UST 15616










































                              page 43
 
17   FACTS ABOUT TRDOS

17.1 TRDOS occupies 112 bytes of RAM

17.2 Without TRDOS connected user RAM commence at:-
     (a) address 23755 without Interface 1 connected,
     (b) address 23813 with Interface 1 connected.

     With TRDOS connected user RAM commences at:-
     (a) address 23867 without Interface 1 conencted,
     (b) address 23925 with Interface 1 connected.

     To   save/load/run   a   program   which   uses   the   bytes
     between 23755  and say  23925 the  procedure in  Section 11.3
     (Magic button) must be followed.

17.3 TRDOS uses disk sectors for storage (see Section 1.2). If the
     number of bytes exceeds 256  another  sector  is  used.  This
     continues untill all the file is saved.

     To save   522 bytes will  occupy 3 sectors.  The third sector
     will contain only 10 bytes.  Only  those  10  bytes  will  be
     loaded from disk. The  empty  remaining  246  bytes  are  not
     loaded to overwrite other data which may be in SOS memory.

17.4 In  addition  to the 112  bytes of RAM the  TRDOS also uses a
     256 bytes buffer when accessing  the  disk.  This  buffer  is
     allocated dynamically.

     When  executing  many  commands  TRDOS first shifts the BASIC
     program (if any) up to create the buffer. After completion of
     the command the BASIC programs  is moved back to its original
     position. The operation is unseen and unnoticed.

17.5 The  MOVE command requires  4K (minumum)  of  Spectrum RAM as
     work  space. If  the MOVE  is being  executed with  a program
     still held in memory  it  will  be  necessary  to  clear  the
     computer and then execute the MOVE. Clearing the computer can
     be done  by returning to SOS and  entering RANDOMIZE USR 0 or
     by using the reset position on the System swith.

17.6 Up to a maximum of 128 files may be stored in one disk.















                              page 44
 
18  PIN CONNECTIONS OF THE DISK DRIVE CONNECTOR

The disk drive connector (see Diagram 1) is designed to be Shugart
compatible, and the pin connections are detailed as below:

          0V -- 1              2 --
          0V -- 3              4 --
          0V -- 5              6 -- Select drive D
          0V -- 7              8 -- Index
          0V -- 9             10 -- Select drive A
          0V -- 11            12 -- Select drive B
          0V -- 13            14 -- Select drive C
          0V -- 15            16 -- Load head ( motor on )
          0V -- 17            18 -- Direction
          0V -- 19            20 -- Step
          0V -- 21            22 -- Write data
          0V -- 23            24 -- Write enable
          0V -- 25            26 -- Track zero
          0V -- 27            28 -- Write protected
          0V -- 29            30 -- Read data
          0V -- 31            32 -- Side 1
          0V -- 33            34 --


The pin  allocation  of  the  connector,  looking  into  the  Disk
Interface from the right (see Diagram 1) is a follow:

          2  4                                               34

          o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

          o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

          1  3                                               33























                              page 45
 
APPENDIX : UTILITY PROGRAMS

There are three Utility programs supplied with TRDOS:
     TAPECOPY - transferring cassette based program
     MAGIC    - renaming, copying and erasing a "family" of files
                saved by the Magic button
     DOCTOR   - disk doctor.

To run one of these programs,  insert  the  Utility  disk  in  the
default drive and enter:

     RUN "boot"

The BASIC program "boot"  will display  a menu  and invide  you to
select  one of the  Utility programs. Alternatively,  you may call
the Utility program directly by typing one of the followings:
     RUN "tapecopy"
     RUN "magic" or
     RUN "doctor"

Once a menus has appeared on the screen, REMOVE THE UTILITY DISK.


A:   TAPECOPY

The Utility  program  TAPECOPY  is  a  relatively  unsophisticated
copier not intended  to  handle  commercial  programs  with  their
sophisticated security precautions.  It is  ideal if  you transfer
your programs and files on cassette.

It will  copy BASIC, CODE, ARRAY and  DATA files provided that the
length  of the file is not greater than 40,000 bytes (for SPECTRUM
& PLUS).

When the program has  been  loaded  you  will  see  the  following
display:

            TAPE TO DISK COPIER VER 5.0
              TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD

          Data type:
          Filename:
          Code length:
          Start line:
          Basic length:

                  PRESS [BREAK] TO STOP
                     START TAPE

Once the display has appeared REMOVE THE UTILITY DISK. The program
will save the cassette based files onto the same drive!

Having replaced the disk with the one to  receive the copied files
all  that is required  is to start  the tape playing  with the EAR
lead from the cassette connected as usual.


                              page 46
 
The procedure is  now automatic.  The display  will  iform  you to
stop the  tape. At the same  time the file is  being copied to the
disk, with the same name as that stored on the tape. When complete
you  will again be told to start the  tape for the next file to be
copied. If  a file with the same name  as that stored on the tape,
then it will be overwritten.

The messages you may are duting copying are:

START TAPE:        Press  the PLAY  key  on  the cassette to start
                   loading.

STOP TAPE:         STOP  the  cassette recorder whilst the program
                   is being copied to disk.

TAPE LOAD ERROR:   The  SOS  message for loading  problems, revind
                   and start again
                   
NOT ENOUGH MEMORY: The  program is longer  than  40,000  bytes. to
                   copy this note down the header details from the
                   display.  Now press BREAK to return to Spectrum
                   SOS.  Clear  the machine with a RANDOMIZE USR 0
                   and load  the program as normal. Use the header
                   details to SAVE  to  disk  in  the  normal  way
                   (Section 10.1).


B : MAGIC

When  the Magic button is  used to dump a  program of the Spectrum
128  computer, a "family" if files (up to 7) are saved. It is very
tedious to  deal with  these files  one by  one. This  menu driven
Utility program enables you to rename, erase ir copy (single drive
or twin drives system) these files easily.


C : DOCTOR

This  Utility program is also menu driven. The disk doctor enables
you  to read, inspect and  modify any sector on  the disk. You may
set  up the drive  (A, B, C  or D), the  sector (0 to  15) and the
track  (0 to 159). After these have been set up, the sector may be
read and stored in the buffer. The sector size is 256 bytes.

The content in the buffer may be displayed and edited. The program
asks for  the starting address  which has a  range of 0  to 255 in
decimal. When  the content is being displayed,  you may stop it by
pressing the  ENTER key. If desired, the  buffer can be saved back
to the disk.

The "change disk" command informs the system that you have changed
the disk in the drive. You may also "verify"a disk.





                              page 47
 
GUERANTEE

This Disk Interface is gueranteed by TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD for a
period of twelve months from the date of purchase against material
defect and bad workmanship.

The  faulty Disk  Interface will  be repaired  or replaced  with a
similar model  during this period at  the discretion of TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH  LTD. The repaired  or replaced model  will be gueranteed
for a period  of  one  month  or  the  balance  of  the  unexpired
guerantee period whichever is longer:

The  guerantee does  not cover  defect caused  through accidential
damage, misuse, or wear  and tear.  The guerantee  is void  if any
attempt has been made by  persons  not  authorised  by  TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH  LTD  to  dismantle  or  repair  any  part  of  the  Disk
Interface.

In  order to  claim the  guerantee you  must return  to TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH LTD  within 14 days of  purchase a completed registration
form with the purchase date and dealer's stamp. The Disk Interface
must  be returned at your own  expenses to TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH LTD
properly protected and insured against damages in transit together
with a brief description of the nature of the fault.

The guerantee does not  affect  your  consumer  rights  under  the
statutory law.

The guerantee is only valid in the United Kingdom.




























                              page 48
 
