Title:          Z88 Lemmings v1.0
Author:         Psygnosis (converted by D Morris)
Uploader:       Dominic Morris <dom@jb.man.ac.uk>
Type:           Z88 Application
Short:          Conversion of *the* classic game


Well, I just can't keep away can I? The lure of the slick black object
grabbed me once more and here I am writing another document file after
I was "giving up computers for good" hmmm, next time I'll be more
convincing!!!

So, here we have another conversion from the Spectrum to that other
rubber keyed friend and it's not a platform game. Wow, myself and
Garry really need to take our medication and get back to converting
platform games.

Now, I'm not gonna insult your intelligence by describing what the
game is about, I'm sure that every sentient body on the planet knows
about, has seen and played Lemmings, so here's the controls:


1       - Decrease release rate
2       - Increase release rate
3-0     - Select Lemming types

ESC     - Armageddon!!! [hehe]
<       - Scroll level left
>       - Scroll level right

Q       - Cursor Up
A       - Cursor Down
O       - Cursor Left
P       - Cursor Right
[SPACE] - Select Lemming
M       - Track Lemming
H       - Pause

Sorry for not making the keys redefinable but I just ran out of memory in
sensible places - hence the lack of cheesy in-game music as well.

Levels should be stored in z88 memory on the default device/directory,
you don't have to keep all 60 of them on the z88 just the ones you
want to play and drag over more when required.

A nice acknowledgement goes out to Garry here for his compression code
which is used on the levels to keep the size down, thanks to him for
kicking me up the backside during this as well - wouldya believe that
I started on this at the same time as he started on Bounder? I'm a lazy
good for nothing, sloppy coder I is!

The sample playing code is based on some TI86 code that was lurking around
on ticalc.org. The samples come from the Amiga version of the game - I
apologise for the quality, but there's only so much a beeper can do!

Lemmings was "Made with Amiga"

dom, 7.2.2000
