===================================
Romantic Robot presents Multiface 3
===================================
Document created by rstuart@ukonline.co.uk on 18th Oct 1999 for:
World of Spectrum: http://www.void.demon.nl/spectrum.html

------
Manual
------

Contents
--------

Connecting the MULTIFACE        1.1 - 1.9
Loading programs                2.0 - 2.1
Saving programs                 2.2 - 2.6
Reloading saved programs        3.1 - 3.3
Print and Alter screens         4.1 - 4.2
DOS use on MULTIFACE 3          4.3 - 4.5
Toolkit                         5.1 - 5.9
The use of extra 8K RAM         6.0

Introduction
------------

MULTIFACE 3 is a multi-purpose interface designed exclusively for the
SPECTRUM+3. It provides fully automatic and universal back-up/transfer of
48/128K programs from tape to disk, disk to tape, tape to tape and disk to
disk. It also incorporates a comprehensive toolkit enabling you to
study/modify/develop software. MULTIFACE 3 can copy screens to printer in
hi-res modes and it extends the use of DOS in 48 SPECTRUM mode. MULTIFACE
is menu-driven, fully error-trapped with on-screen prompts and it largely
uses a system of one-touch commands. It is very easy to use and does not
really need a separate written manual. Nonetheless, the following few pages
should help you to understand every aspect of MULTIFACE 3 operations so that
you can use it to its fullest possible potential.

1. Connecting Multiface
-----------------------

1.1   Switch off and unplug your computer and any peripherals which have
      independent power supplies. Remove any peripherals attached to the
      expansion port.
1.2   Firmly push the MULTIFACE connector onto the expansion port.
1.3   Attach the other peripherals, if any, making sure they are pushed
      well home. Check all connections carefully.
1.4   Plug in the computer and peripherals and switch on.
1.5   Test that all is working by pressing the Red STOP button. If a 2-line
      menu comes up at the bottom of the screen, all is well and you can
      explore MULTIFACE further or press r to return and carry on with
      whatever you wish.
1.6   If you get random coloured squares, or other garbage, switch off,
      disconnect everything from the mains, clean both sides of the
      expansion port and repeat 1.2-1.5.
1.7   In the unlikely event that the screen remains corrupted or menu does
      not come up, switch off, remove all other peripherals, reread the
      instructions and retry 1.2-1.5

1.9   Turning MULTIFACE 'o'n and 'o'ff:
      MULTIFACE 3 has a software operated switch to prevent it clashing with
      other software or hardware products. The switch is also vital to
      enable loading programs saved by any previous MULTIFACE model. As a
      rule, upon switching the Spectrum+3 on, the MULTIFACE is OFF and
      therefore "invisible". It is automatically switched ON anytime when
      you press the red button which has in fact a dual function: it both
      switched ON (but not OFF) and acts the MULTIFACE. Once the MULTIFACE
      is active, it remains ON as confirmed at the bottom right. To turn it
      off again, press o - when in the main menu - to change on to off; when
      you return to program, MULTIFACE will remain OFF. Remember, that
      MULTIFACE can always be activated by the red button, irrespective if
      it was ON or OFF before.

NB: Sale of this product is not designed to encourage piracy! You may not use
it to infringe copyright by selling or giving away copies, or origionals of
which you have kept copies. Piracy is theft and Romantic Robot wishes to make
its position absolutely clear on this matter. If you are in any doubt about
as to whether it is legal to make backup copies of a particular commercial
program even if solely for your own use, please contact the copyright owners.
In order to protect copyright, back up copies taken with MULTIFACE THREE will
not then reload unless MULTIFACE is connected.

SPECTRUM is a reg. trademark of AMSTRAD Consumer Electronics
MULTIFACE 3 is designed, manufactured and trademarked by ROMANTIC ROBOT UK
Ltd., 54 Deanscroft Avenue, London NW9 8EN

2. Loading
----------

MULTIFACE does not save or transfer or change programs as such, it saves an
image, a snapshot (in a compressed form) of the computer memory, frozen at
the instant the red button was pressed. It does not therefore matter how
you loaded a program in the first place, whether it was protected or not -
as long as you LOAD a program, MULTIFACE will save it. Upon reloading,
everything is fully automatically restored and the program autostarts from
the point at which it was stopped - make sure you have your hands at the
fire button...

2.1   How to LOAD programs before saving:
      It is essential to understand the differences between the 4 options
      available on the Spectrum+3, namely the +3 BASIC 128/48 mode and
      48 BASIC locked mode. When you switch on or reset the Spectrum+3, you
      can select:
2.1.1 LOADER - goes into 128K mode, attempts to autoboot from disc and if
      it fails it proceeds to load from tape. In order to autoboot, the
      program must either be called "DISK" or the disk must contain a special
      "bootstrap" sector. This is important to remember and, when using
      MULTIFACE for saving, use the name "DISK" for the program you wish
      to autoboot (see 2.4).

2.1.2 +3 BASIC - defaults to 128K mode and DOS: you can then
2.1.2.1 load from disc - type LOAD "name" and press <ENTER>
2.1.2.2 load from tape - type LOAD "T:name" (or LOAD "T:" and LOAD "") and
        press <ENTER>
2.1.2.3 change to 48 BASIC - type SPECTRUM and press ENTER; to load from
        tape - press J to obtain LOAD, then type "" (or "name") and
        <ENTER>

IMPORTANT: Although the above 48 BASIC is unlocked, it does not itself give
you any access to the disc operating ststem in BASIC. MULTIFACE, on the other
hand, CAN even in this mode fully use the DOS which is extremely useful. Thus
to load from disc - press dos in the main menu and then load a program.

2.1.3 Calculator - not really suitable for MULTIFACE use.

2.1.4 48 BASIC - locks the Spectrum into 48K mode where the disc operating
      system is NEVER available. This means that while you can use the
      MULTIFACE, you will only be able to save to tapes: the disc option
      (just as the DOS option in the main menu) will not even be displayed.
      If you still wish to save to disc, you must first save to tape, switch
      off/reset, select +3 BASIC or LOADER, re-load the saved program from
      tape and then save to disc.

In summary, you can use
2.1.5 LOADER to 1) load from tape & later save to tape/disc
                2) load autobooting programs from disc and later save to
                   tape or disc
2.1.6 +3 BASIC to load any 48/128K program from tape or disc and save to
      tape/disc, even in 48 SPECTRUM mode
2.1.7 48 BASIC but load/save 48K programs from/to tape only. Or, in other
      words, if you have a
2.1.8.1 48K programs on tape, use LOADER or +3 BASIC, but not 48 "locked"
        BASIC (it can't save to disc)
2.1.8.2 128K program on tape, use LOADER or +3 BASIC
2.1.8.3 48/128K program on disc, use +3 BASIC - or LOADER if the program
        autoboots; do not use 48 BASIC

2.2 Saving
----------

2.2.1 At any instant you wish to save a program or screen, press the RED
      button.
2.2.2 The main menu will appear at the bottom of the screen with 5-6
      options, depending on which mode you are in. In LOADER and +3 BASIC
      in 128 and SPECTRUM mode:

           return save tool print dos alter clear
                                               on

      In 48 locked mode:

           return save tool print          LOCKED
                                               on

2.3   'C'learing before saving:
      Before you proceed to save, decide first wether you wish to save the
      entire RAM, incl. the additional RAM banks, or not - this will
      influence the saving/loading time and the amount of code saved. When
      the Spectrum is switched on or reset, RAM banks 1,3,4,6 are marked
      throughout by E5 characters for RAM disc use (M Drive). It is good
      practice to clear these banks before loading (see also 2.5.3) to make
      sure that a program will load into a 'clean' computer. Obvoiusly, with
      128K programs, the extra RAM banks are important, but not all may
      be used - hence clear before loading. In 48K programs, the entire
      RAM banks are irrelevent and you can clear them any time, even after
      loading (except for the 48 locked mode with nothing to clear). Please
      note, that bank 7 is never cleared as the SPECTRUM +3 uses it as
      workspace.

2.4   Saving a program:
      Having pressed s to proceed to saving, the prompt will change by
      asking for a filename. Unlike on normal disc files, UP TO 7 letters/
      digits ONLY can be used. Letters can be typed both in upper and lower
      case but will be always taken as upper case only. Usual rules for
      filenames apply, with the exception that you cannot use extensions.
      The following are all illegal filenames:

           DISK    NEVER12   WRIGGLE

      These are not:-

           Disk.bin   (no extensions allowed)
           Never m    (no spaces allowed)
           Wriggler   (too long)
           my,prog    (no punctuation marks allowed)

      Remember, that the name "DISK" will autoboot a disk.
2.4.1 If you suddenly decide NOT to save the program at this stage, pressing
      abort will take you back to the Main Menu, whilst r will return you
      to the program.

2.5   Saving menu options:
      Upon ENTERing the filename, the display will change and you will see
      the following prompts:-

            abort tape disk                  128K (or 48K)
            (screen or program)       compress ON (or OFF)

      Once again, you can abort to return to the main menu.

2.5.1 'P'rogram or 'S'creen saving:
      Pressing p or s lets you save the whole program or just the screen
      (see 4.2). Program is saved by default.

2.5.2 'C'ompressing:
      MULTIFACE automatically compresses the whole RAM. The compression can
      be disabled by pressing c, but the only reason for doing so is for
      disassembling the actual files saved by the MULTIFACE (true RAM image)
      - for m/code enthusiasts only! Please note then when saving screens,
      the compression is automatically turned off to preserve screens in
      their traditional - and compatible - format.

2.5.3 Selecting the 48/128 'K' format:
      You do not really need to select the above option, but it can save
      loading/saving time and room on disc/tape.

      MULTIFACE can at this stage, no matter if you cleared in the main
      menu or not, save either the origional 48K Spectrum blocks 5,2,0 or
      the entire 128K (block 0-7). Obviously choosing the 48K option in a
      128K program would not make sense, but with 48K programs this will
      ensure that absolutely minimal amount of bytes will be saved. It must
      be noted though, that while it's safe to use the 48K option with most
      48K programs (always with the pre-Spectrum+3 programs or with pure
      m/code ones), you cannot use it when saving BASIC programs written in
      Spectrum+3 BASIC - these use RAM 7 without "letting you know" and the
      48K option cuts bank 7 completely.

      The main difference between the clear option in the main menu and the
      48K option is, that clear does not clear bank 7 but it clears banks
      1,3,4,6 (which are always used - either as RAM disc or as RAM banks in
      128K programs - and would therefore be saved by the MULTIFACE with the
      rest). If you clear and then use 128K option, MULTIFACE will compress
      the entire RAM, incl. the extra banks, and this may take a bit of
      time and room. If you use 48K option, it does not matter whether you
      cleared before or not; the MULTIFACE will wate no time in compressing
      anything else but the BASIC banks 5,2,0 and save just these - it is
      faster and more effective.

      There are two reasons to use clear:
      a) before LOADING a 128K program - the program may not use all 8 RAM
      banks and it is best to clear these first
      b) when you have a 48K BASIC program and are not sure if it uses RAM
      block 7 or not - it is safer to clear and use 128K option.
      Please note, that in the locked 48 BASIC mode there is no 128K option
      and thus 48K option is not switchable.

2.5.4 Saving to 't'ape or 'd'isc:
      Having decided to save a program or screen, compress or not and use
      48 or 128K mode (the defaults are a compressed program in 128K mode -
      or 48K in the locked mode), you can save to tape or disk.
2.5.4.1 To save to disc, press d: please ensure the disc is formatted and
        has sufficient space. MULTIFACE combines a thorough error-trapping
        with on-screen prompts - thus for instance, DRIVE NOT READY appears
        if the disk is not formatted or inserted, FILE TOO BIG if there is
        not enough space for the file to be saved in which case the amount of
        K needed as opposed to available on disk flashes above. WRITE PROTECT
        warns that protection tab on the disk prevents it to be used for
        saving. In all of these cases just insert another suitable disk and
        press ENTER to continue.
2.5.4.2 If moving to tape, make sure the tape is in position and is long
        enough. Press Play & Record on your tape recorder, then press
        <ENTER>.
2.6     When saving is complete, you will be returned to the Main Menu and
        you can then either return to continue the program or use any other
        function of MULTIFACE 3.

3 Reloading Programs
--------------------

3.1   MULTIFACE must be attached to reload programs it saved. It also needs
      to be ON (see 1.9). If it is OFF, you will be reminded to turn it ON
      once the program starts loading: message M3 LOADING will change to
      M3 NOT ON!. Just press the red button and return - M3 LOADING will
      come up again and the program will soon load.

3.2   Selecting Spectrum+3 modes for loading:
      You can use LOADER or +3 BASIC (128K and Spectrum mode) to reload
      programs saved by the MULTIFACE. The programs will automatically
      configure themselves - you can even load a 128K program into the
      Spectrum (48K) mode and it will adjust itself. You cannot, however,
      load a 128K program into the 48 BASIC mode and are not advised to use
      this mode anyway - you can use it to load 48K MULTIFACE programs, but
      cannot save them to disc then!

3.3   Loading multi-part programs from disc:
      MULTIFACE 3 allows you to load a program from within a program - this
      can be very convenient for loading multi-part programs. Generally, you
      have to save this type of programs at various stages (mostly when they
      take another part from tape or disc), Say you do this at the beginning
      of each part and end up with 4 parts, or rather 4 programs saved by the
      MULTIFACE. When you re-load the first, play it and reach part No. 2,
      you can press the red button, go into the DOS option and load: when
      asked for a filename, use the 2nd part name and MULTIFACE will load
      it and overwrite the current part.

4 Print and Alter
-----------------

4.1   'P'rint command:
       Pressing p dumps a screen to a printer via the Spectrum printer port
       provided your printer has EPSON graphics compatability. By using the
       TOOLKIT to poke the relevant addresses, you can choose a large or
       shaded copy, set line feed, all margins and even line spacing:

       2008H (8200 decimal): B1 - Large Copy with CR and LF (carriage return
                                  + line feed)
                             F1 - Shaded copy with CR and LF
                             00 - Large copy with CR only
                             F0 - Shaded copy with CR only
       200BH (8203 decimal): 08 - sets left margin (0-255)
       200CH (8204 decimal): 23 - sets bottom margin (0-23)
       200DH (8205 decimal):  0 - sets top margin (0-23)
       200E-2010H (8206-8):  27,51,23 (ESC "3" n) - sets line spacing in
                             n/216: some printers require a different syntax
                             say 27,65,3 (ESC "A" n - in n/32)  for Brother
                             HR5
       2011-2014H (8209-12): 27,78,0,3 (ESC "L" n m) - sets the graphic mode

4.2    'A'lter screens (in 128K mode only!):
       SPECTRUM+3 allows the use of two different screens - in addition to
       the standard 16384-23296 screen, there is a provision for a second
       screen at 49152-56064. MULTIFACE allows you to use/save/print both
       screens (see 2.5.1, 4.1) and the a key lets you swap them at will. The
       screen shown is the one that can be saved or copied. Since the 2nd
       screen area may not always be used as a screen, you may end up getting
       a black square or garbage - just press a again to call back the
       origional screen.

DOS and Toolkit
---------------

4.3    'D'OS (Disc Operating System):
       MULTIFACE can access the DOS any time except when you are in 48 BASIC.
       There are two main reasons to use it:

4.4    'L'oading from disc:
       You can load any program from disc here, even when you are in the
       +3 BASIC SPECTRUM mode! You may simply find it more convenient upon
       switching the SPECTRUM+3 on to press the MULTIFACE red button, choose
       dos and load a program - rather than selecting Loader or +3 BASIC and
       then typing in all necessary Spectrum system, etc. Also see 3.2 for
       loading multi-part programs - invaluable!

4.5    'E'rasing files:
       You may find it necessary to erase files from disk at times:-
       MULTIFACE may say that FILE is TOO BIG to save and display the amount
       of K required. You can at such stages use dos to erase: MULTIFACE will
       show you a file at a time in the bottom line with its name and length
       and ask you yes/no to erase it or not. You can in a way catalogue
       discs by saying no all the time, as files will infinately scroll in
       the bottom line. You can abort erasing and then abort again to go to
       the main menu.

5.1    Accessing the Toolkit:
       Press t from the main menu to obtain the toolkit menu:

            quit ENTpoke SPCaddr reg win hx txt pr a

5.2    Quit:
       You can quit any time back to the main menu.

5.3    ENTER key:
       ENTER has a twofold role - it lets you both PEEK & POKE:
5.3.1  If you type in a number (0-255 Decimal, &00 - &FF Hex), pressing
       ENTER will POKE it into the current address.
5.3.2  If you wish to PEEK only, do NOT input any number, just press ENTER.
       By pressing ENTER repeatedly, you can step through successive
       addresses. You can again POKE any time by inputting a number before
       pressing ENTER.

5.3.3  SPACE key:
       Pressing the SPACE key enables you to enter an address (in Hex or
       Decimal - see 5.4) which you wish to inspect or alter. You will now
       be able to alter and inspect successive addresses as detailed in
       5.3.1-5.3.2 above.

5.4    'H'ex or Decimal:
       This toggles the bottom display and input line between Hex and
       Decimal. When you input a number, please ensure which mode you are in:
       MULTIFACE has no way of knowing whether a number was meant to be in
       Hex or Decimal and thus 10 will be 10 in Decimal but 16 in Hex, etc.

5.5    'R'egisters:
       At the moment of pressing the red button, MULTIFACE stores the
       contents of all the registers in its own RAM. Pressing r allows you
       to inspect and alter them at will. Each successive location stores
       the contents of a sinble 8 bit register or of half a 16 bit register.
       In all cases, registers are stored in INTEL format with the low byte
       first, followed by the high byte. The order in which they are stored
       is the following:

       PC IY IX BC' DE' HI' AF' BC DE R- I- HL AF SP

       Thus on pressing R, you will see the memory location 16356 (&3FE4),
       its contents and letters 'pC' - the low byte of the PC pair. Press
       <ENTER> to see the next address (16357). Its value and letters 'Pc',
       i.e. the high byte of the PC register.

5.6    'W'indow:
       Pressing w opens a window with 16 lines of 8 bytes each. The window
       opens 'around' the current address used in the bottom line and shows
       it flashing in the 5th line.

5.6.1  Window Full Screen Editing:
       The window is not just a passive display. Full screen editing is
       possible, making peeking and poking so much easier. When you scroll/
       move through the window in any direction, the cursor movement is
       reflected in the bottom line and the address and value (corresponding
       to the flashing window cursor) changes accordingly. Thus if you find
       an address in the window by moving the flashing cursor, it will be
       simultaneously shown at the bottom. Similarly, if you input an address
       by using SPACE/ENTER, the window will open around it. You can use the
       cursor keys for moving a byte or a line at a time. The left & right
       cursor keys move the cursor as you would expect, but the up and down
       cursors scroll the whole display, keeping the cursor where it is. In
       other words, by using the up cursor you actually decrement addresses,
       whilst the down cursor increments. There are two more 'hidden keys'
       for editing:

       minus moves the whole page (128 bytes) backwards
       next moves the whole page forwards (see also 5.8)

5.7    'T'ext:
       The window contents are by default shown in Hex, irrespective of the
       status of the bottom line - the h key has no effect on the window.
       However, the TOOLKIT has another powerful feature in translating the
       window into ASCII codes - which is what the t key does. By toggling
       it you can view everything as text - this is very handy in revealing
       messages (and easily modifying them) or just showing the code makes
       no sense as text.

5.8    'P'rint:
       You can print out the window contents: MULTIFACE uses ASCII DUMP here
       and prints out characters/numbers only. To print out a longer section
       of code, use SPACE/ENTER to input the start address, print the window,
       go to next window, print again, etc. Line feed can be turned on/off
       by poking 8200 with 1/0.

5.9    'S'elect a RAM bank:
       The TOOLKIT operates within a 64K area of which the bottom 48K is
       strictly defined but the remaining top 16K is switchable and can be
       used as a viewing/working area for all 8 RAM banks. (Nos. 0-7). As
       a rule:

           0- 8191 (&0000-&1FFF) is the old Spectrum BASIC ROM
        8192-16383 (&2000-&3FFF) is the MULTIFACE's 8K RAM
       16384-32767 (&4000-&7FFF) is Spectrum RAM block No.5
       32768-49151 (&8000-&BFFF) is Spectrum RAM block No.2
       49152-65535 (&C000-&FFFF) defaults to showing RAM No.0

       but pressing s followed by a number 0-7 will page the corresponding
       RAM here and you can inspect/alter it. Upon leaving the toolkit RAM
       No.0 will be automatically paged back here (see also Spectrum manual
       p. 182, etc.).

6.0 The Use of Extra 8K RAM
---------------------------

The MULTIFACE's 8K RAM extension can be accessed and used for other purposes.
This, however, requires a good knowledge of machine code plus further
information on how to access the RAM extension.
